All right.
Who here has ever opened a dashboard
with 18 or more filters spread across six tabs
and wondered what you were even looking at?
Let's see some hands, right?
Now I want you to imagine that you're not a data scientist,
right, you're an executive who has to make a decision
in the next 10 minutes, right?
This might be you frantically clicking around,
trying to make sense of things,
or maybe you have some bigger feelings, right?
Truth is, we've all probably been there, right,
and it never feels good.
So, welcome to my dashboard support group.
Let's do a quick check-in.
Raise your hand if you've ever designed a UI
with more than 10 filters, drop-downs, toggles, whatever.
Keep them up if you've gone over 20.
Nice.
All right, how about this?
Who's ever had a client ask for just one more drop-down
when you knew it was gonna be too much?
All right, if you're nodding along to this,
no judgment here, you're among friends.
My name is Jeremy, and I've been there, too.
I'm a psychologist by training,
but probably not the type that comes to mind
when I say that.
A lot of folks, when they think about psychology,
they think about couches and therapy,
but the field itself is really driven by data.
And my journey took me from studying
how groups make decisions under pressure
to accidentally designing systems that cause that pressure
to then figuring out how we can fix them.
And after years of building dashboards
that were technically great,
but didn't quite land with users, I had this realization.
A lot of dashboard failures aren't technical.
They're psychological.
They don't fail because of the wrong chart type
or the wrong database.
They fail because we're making them for humans,
and humans are complicated.
But we can engineer for psychology
just as much as we engineer for performance.
Let me show you what I mean.
This is a dashboard from a client of mine.
Details blinded, of course,
but they had built a really impressive dashboard themselves.
They had lots of filters, customized views,
and despite what you see here,
they actually had some really cool visualizations
buried in some of their deep dives.
The client loved it.
Users could analyze anything they wanted,
except they never did.
They opened the app,
and shortly after, they completely deserted it
and found creative workarounds like Excel.
So, we collected some telemetry data for about 30 days,
and just to kind of get an idea
of what people were doing with the dashboard.
We rolled this out in a minor update
to get some users engaged in just to see
what they were actually doing with the application.
And it painted this user journey clip of despair here.
95% of users, they opened the URL.
Fantastic, they were really interested in it,
even though they'd seen this dashboard before,
and we told them it was just a minor update.
88% went further, actually opened the dashboard,
so they got past that landing page.
But this is where things get brutal.
About half only used one filter, just one.
And about a fifth returned after a week.
So, this chart is screaming at us,
stop doing this to your users.
Something is wrong here.
But how do we know what that is?
Well, with behavioral science,
which is the study of how people think, feel, and act.
Typically in the context of decision making.
But across decades of research,
what we find is that people are rational,
but in surprisingly predictable ways.
And so for us as developers, this is actually good news,
because we can understand that strange user behavior
of ours and design for it.
So here's a classic study to illustrate what I mean here.
Researchers set up a tasting test at a grocery store
and varied the number of jams that they had
on display at this table.
And in the big display condition,
there were 24 jams on the table.
In the small display condition, there were only six jams.
And the big display with 24 jams
actually attracted more shoppers.
60% of people stopped,
whereas only 40% of people stopped in the small condition.
But only 3% of people in that large condition
actually bought jam,
whereas 30% did in the small condition.
So that's a convergent difference of 10 times.
And so this is exactly what's going on
with our dashboards, right?
We're seeing more features and more options
attract attention, but paralyze choice.
And so paradox of choice is one key component here,
but there's a lot of concepts in behavioral science
that we can pull from that are applicable to dashboards.
We don't have time to go through all of them,
I'm just gonna pull out some common themes here,
just talk really high level about them,
because they're not just abstract theories.
These are engineering principles
that we can leverage in our dashboards.
Cognitive load, for example, right?
This is how having too many choices
can actually overwhelm our mental capacity.
So think of this like RAM.
Your users have processing limits,
and each filter adds a processing cost.
Progressive disclosure is the idea
that we're kind of hiding complexity
until it's actually needed, right?
And so we're showing that vital information first,
those key points up first,
and then just revealing more later on.
It's kind of like lazy loading for human cognition.
And then for immunoflex,
I'll show you a more concrete example of this,
but this is how basically the same exact data
can show two very different stories.
So revenue being up 15% might be a true statement,
but it could also be true
that it's missing the target by 5%.
And so unless folks are talking about that,
they might be coming from two very different places.
And so when we apply this to dashboards,
this might mean showing three filters
instead of all 18 at first.
It might mean showing summaries
instead of those detailed outputs, right?
And so this is how we start to engineer
for the user experience.
But what if you don't know anything
about behavioral science, right?
Well, you fall back on things
that you do know something about.
And I bet you'd know a little something about road trips,
especially if you took the road trip here, right?
And so engineering apps with behavioral science
is a lot like planning for a road trip.
You need to know your destination,
you need to anticipate the hazards,
and you need to make sure everyone arrives there safely.
Right, and that's where the behavioral insight design
or the bid framework, right?
The five simple stages that guide you through this process
and help prevent those dashboard disasters
that we've all seen.
And what makes this different from other UX advice
is that it's a concrete step-by-step framework
built on decades of research.
And each stage builds into the next,
so this provides this continuous feedback loop
that helps you keep improving your dashboard
whenever you'd like to revisit that.
Plus, the whole thing is bundled into an R package,
so it does levy lifting for you.
So meet BidUX, right?
It's designed specifically for our workflows
as Shiny developers,
and it works with any dashboard that you've already built.
So you don't need to refactor, no need to start over.
If you have telemetry data, that's great.
It'll actually analyze that data
and give you data-driven insights.
But if you don't have any telemetry data,
you can still just use simple verbal descriptions
based on what you've seen or what your users have reported.
But whatever inputs you provide,
it will use those to auto-suggest improvements
based on the available research.
Think of it as having a behavioral science in your console.
Always available, never judges,
and doesn't charge by the hour.
So let me show you what this process actually looks like.
So first we start with the interpret stage,
the why behind the dashboard,
because the central question here
is really what's driving the focus for your users.
It's what they're coming to the dashboard for
in the first place.
And that data story helps create
the narrative structure for this.
So humans are hardwired for stories, not pivot tables.
Context, the hook, tension, resolution,
all of this is the structure that folks are looking for
with their key insights.
And so we build that in from the start.
And then finally, users and personas help us developers
take that user perspective.
Project manager probably doesn't think in SQL terms.
They think in business outcomes.
So we need to make sure the dashboard bridges that gap.
And then putting all of that together,
the function will summarize that
and let you know if you're missing any information.
And if you are, it's probably a good time to go back
and check in with your client,
make sure you're considering their perspective,
because when we neglect that context,
we end up building friction points into our user interfaces.
Which is what the second stage, notice, is about.
So going back to my client's dashboard,
this is a summary of the telemetry data
we collected on the filter usage.
So 14 filters here, hardly ever used.
And half of those were hardly even touched.
So this is technical debt visualized.
Each unused filter, that's maintenance overhead.
There might even be database queries running
on the back end for those unused filters.
And so this is why the notice stage
focuses on finding those friction points.
The package auto-suggests relevant behavioral theories
with confidence scores.
So in this case, it's suggesting cognitive load theory
with a 90% confidence score.
But it might also suggest choice overload
or decision fatigue.
It depends on the context from those users or personas
and what you're feeding into it at this stage.
It starts to transform that user feedback of it's confusing
into something more specific, like an engineering principle
of cognitive load exceeding working memory.
So you're not guessing anymore,
you're addressing identified psychological barriers
with code changes.
The package will also suggest bias mitigations
based on the dashboard context and personas.
So again, using that previous stage information,
it will suggest specific information processing biases.
And also specific ways to mitigate them.
So in this case, we're getting an anchoring,
framing, confirmation bias.
And these are all bugs that it's identifying
in human cognition.
And these are bugs that affect every user in some capacity.
But now we can start to guard for them.
So in my client's case, we had multiple stakeholders
who were coming from different teams
with different perspectives.
And so we focused a lot on framing effects.
And so in this case, we had added a toggle.
In the progress or the gain frame,
this was showing that relative difference
between the raw value and the client's benchmark.
And so this was highlighting the achievements
that the marketing team was interested in.
But when we switched to a loss frame, or a gap frame,
we're looking at the raw values versus that benchmark
instead of the relative difference.
And so now, this is looking more at the improvements
that still need to be made.
And so with this, we have the same data,
but a very different story.
This is proactive bugging for human psychology.
Because now teams can coordinate and align
on what they're actually seeing
and what their concerns are.
Okay, so at this point, we know what the dashboard's for.
We've looked at the problems we need to fix.
We've looked at the targeted biases to guard against.
And now, it's time to put everything
into a structured information flow.
All right, and so using BidStructure,
we can get specific implementation suggestions.
Not just reduce complexity,
but use BSLibAccordion for progressive disclosure,
for example.
The package shows which components
should map to the theory.
So it's tying specific functions from Shiny,
from BSLib, from different packages
that we might use to build into our workflows
to these principles.
And it gives multiple options and suggestions to try.
So for example, see this F pattern here?
This is how most users are scanning dashboards
in Western cultures.
Top left gets most of the attention.
Bottom right might as well not exist.
And so this structure stage
is putting the most important information up front
where the eyes will naturally go.
So critical KPIs, summaries,
those are placed at the top.
The supporting details follow the F pattern,
and deep dives progressively get disclosed
towards the bottom.
And finally, from here, we get to the last stage.
We'll feed this into our validation stage,
where we validate not only what we've done,
but we also look for ways to empower user engagement.
So this helps you as the developer
know whether the dashboard is working as intended,
but also helps users know what to expect next.
It'll guide developers through all the changes,
through iterations, and it will also suggest,
again, different ways of not only empowerment,
but even collaborating between your users,
your end users and teams.
So for example, in this case,
we looked at executive summaries,
because this client had, again, a lot of different teams
coming from different backgrounds,
and they really wanted these key takeaways
to be up and prominent.
And so what we did is we looked at the executive summaries,
we placed those at the top,
and then we tailored them to the user personas.
So for executives, they were a little bit more
high-level, targeted, action-oriented.
But for developers or analysts,
those were a little bit more tech-oriented
and a little bit more low-level.
And so this generates also other checklists after this
to validate and also look for other accessibility checks
to really help you as the developer guide
and create those aha moments for your users.
Validation isn't the last stage either.
It can feed back into interpret,
so creating that feedback loop.
But let's take a moment and look at the transformation
of my client's dashboard here.
So here's the dashboard disaster again.
Technically perfect, but psychologically broken.
Had everything except for its own users.
So let's see what behavioral science can do
to turn this around.
All right, here's the same dashboard,
but with a transformed user experience.
We have clean executive summary at the top.
Users know immediately what matters
and what to do about it.
We have progressive disclosure, complexity available,
but isn't required.
And if you want to get even more into the details,
we have those further at the bottom end of the deep dives.
We also have smart defaults that are based
on actual usage patterns, not just assumptions.
And we telemetry the data, so the before and after.
We see filter usage up 38%.
People are actually exploring instead of abandoning shit.
Return rate up 75%.
They're actually coming back now.
And this is the ROI of behavioral science.
It's not magic, it's not AI.
It's designing for how human minds actually think.
We're reducing that cognitive load,
we're aligning with mental models,
and we're creating a clear information hierarchy.
That gives us more users, deeper engagement,
and stronger retention, because we're removing obstacles
instead of just adding features.
And as a developer, that means less support tickets,
less feature requests, because your users are starting
to find what they need and figure it out on their own.
It also might mean potentially better performance reviews,
because now you're building products that are driving value.
And that's really the difference between just building
in features and building products that people love.
And here are just some more results from other clients
from the last year or so of when I've been integrating
this BID framework here.
And on average, we're just seeing people engage
with the dashboard longer.
It's performing better in general,
and we're getting rid of unneeded,
because we're getting rid of unneeded processes.
And we're seeing more user traffic across the board.
And this is just becoming effective across the board,
across these different domains,
because human psychology is predictable,
even as irrational as it might be at times.
Your finance users have the same working memory slots
as your healthcare users, and so this framework adapts
to different domains, because the principles
remain consistent across those domains.
And here's the really nice part.
Implementing this psychology is just a few lines of code.
If you have telemetry, simply load it
with the BID telemetry function.
And then here, I'm just filtering down
to one of the critical issues identified,
and then adding the central question
to contextualize everything that follows.
Then I use BID notice.
It's a BID notice issue.
It's a bridge function for the telemetry data
that will feed and populate the following stages.
From there, it's just running through the rest of the steps,
and optionally ending with BID report.
This will create a markdown report for PR,
for documentation, whatever your needs might be.
Now, if you don't have telemetry data,
that's not a problem either, because you can simply
fill it in manually based on your observations
or user feedback.
So, start by creating your data story
to structure the dashboard's narrative.
Identify the friction points, because even without data,
you probably know where your users are struggling
to some extent.
And we have that same five-stage pipeline
with the same actual insights.
And this BID report function can generate markdown,
can generate text, or HTML, depending on your needs.
But this overall framework is really guiding you
whether you have a lot of telemetry data
or just simple user feedback.
And you can start this during the early age
of development.
You don't need to wait until you've deployed the dashboard.
You can iterate on this before problems
even surface for your users.
BID UX is currently available on CRAN,
so installation is really simple.
Just simply install and load the library,
and then run through those five stages,
because even with minimal input,
you get valuable suggestions.
And there's also a BID concepts function,
so if you're unfamiliar with a function,
you can explore that.
It's kind of like having a psychological textbook
right there on hand.
So, with that, I've also compiled a lot of resources here
for you to check out.
These slides will be in the BID framework repo.
The BID UX repo is also listed there,
and I love how this community learns
and shares from one another,
so please feel free to connect with me.
I'd love to hear and learn
from your dashboard challenges as well.
And if you remember just one thing from our time today,
dashboards don't need features,
they need fewer obstacles.
Every dropdown should just bring our users closer
to Insight, not further from it.
So, let's work on that together,
and before I close, I want to give my heartfelt thanks
to the Posit Conf organizers
for creating this great space,
the community for pushing things forward,
and for all of you for caring about your users.
So, thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you for your talk.
So, the first question is does BID UX,
does the BID UX package rely on external services
and or LLMs because they work at a university
with sensitive data,
so they're interested in how you work with that data?
Yep, no, there's no LLMs.
It's basically fuzzy matching, smart matching,
based on a dictionary,
so kind of mapping keywords to concepts right now.
So, no LLMs, no external services.
Are there any possible ways
to expand BID UX to Cordo dashboards?
Yes, it's been on the roadmap.
I'm currently thinking about that,
but if you have any insights or suggestions,
I would love to hear them
because it's definitely something I'm thinking about.
All right, last question.
How does the package interpret
or scan the dashboard beyond telemetry?
Are there some of these features unavailable,
are some of these features available
without telemetry set up?
Yes, it's fully functional without telemetry.
It's just telemetry will give you
more specific and deeper insights.
So, the more information, the better.
All right, actually, one more.
How did you collect analytics for dashboard usage,
especially filter usage?
Shiny telemetry package.
All right.
That's it.
Thanks, Jeremy.
Thank you.
Appreciate it.
Thank you!
Thank you.